 There are so many airmen here, and they are so sure of themselves that they give chase to single individuals, just as though they were hares. For every one German plane there come at least five English and American. For one hungry, wretched German soldier come five of the enemy, fresh and fit. For one German army loaf there are fifty tins of canned beef over there. We are not beaten, for as soldiers we are better and more experienced; we are simply crushed and driven back by overwhelming superior forces.
 Behind us lay rainy weeks: grey sky, grey fluid earth, grey dying. If we go out, the rain at once soaks through our overcoat and clothing; and we remain wet all the time we are in the line. We never get dry. Those who will wear high boots tie sand bags round the tops so that the mud does not pour in so fast. The rifles are caked, the uniforms caked, everything is fluid and dissolved, the earth one dripping, soaked, oily mass in which lie yellow pools with red spiral streams of blood and into which the dead, wounded, and survivors slowly sink down.
 The storm lashes us, out of the confusion of grey and yellow the hail of splinters whips forth the child-like cries of the wounded, and in the night shattered life groans painfully into silence.
 Our hands are earth, our bodies clay and our eyes pools of rain. We do not know whether we still live.
 Then the heat sinks heavily into our shell-holes like a jelly fish, moist and oppressive, and on one of these late summer days, while bringing food, Kat falls. We two are alone. I bind up his wound; his shin seems to be smashed. It has got the bone, and Kat groans desperately: "At last, just at the last…"
 I comfort him. "Who knows how long this mess will go on yet! Now you are saved…"
 The wound begins to bleed fast. Kat cannot be left by himself while I try to find a stretcher. Anyway, I don't know of a stretcher-bearer's post in the neighbourhood.
 Kat is not very heavy; so I take him up on my back and start off to the dressing station with him.
 Twice we rest. He suffers acutely on the way. We do not speak much. I have opened the collar of my tunic and breathe heavily, I sweat and my face is swollen with the strain of carrying. All the same I urge him to let us go on, for the place is dangerous.
 "Shall we go on again Kat?"
 "Must, Paul."
 "Then come."
 I raise him up, he stands on the uninjured leg and supports himself against a tree. I take up the wounded leg carefully, then he gives a jump and I take the knee of the sound leg also under my arm.
 The going is more difficult. Often a shell whistles across. I go as quickly as I can, for the blood from Kat's wound drips to the ground. We cannot shelter ourselves properly from the explosions; before we can take cover the danger is all over.
 We lie down in a small hole to wait till the shelling is over. I give Kat some tea from my water bottle. We smoke a cigarette. "Well, Kat," I say gloomily, "We are going to be separated at last."
 He is silent and looks at me.
 "Do you remember, Kat, how we commandeered the goose? And how you brought me out of the barrage when I was still a young recruit and was wounded for the first time? I cried then. Kat, that is almost three years ago."
 He nods.
 The anguish of solitude rises up in me. When Kat is taken away I will not have one friend left.
 "Kat, in any case we must see one another again, if it is peace-time before you come back."
 "Do you think that I will be marked Al again with this leg?" he asks bitterly.
 "With rest it will get better. The joint is quite sound. It may get all right again."
 "Give me another cigarette," he says.
 "Perhaps we could do something together later on, Kat." I am very miserable, it is impossible that Kat, Kat my friend, Kat with the drooping shoulders and the poor, thin moustache, Kat, whom I know as I know no other man, Kat with whom I have shared these years, it is impossible that perhaps I shall not see Kat again.
 "In any case give me your address at home, Kat. And here is mine, I will write it down for you." 
 I write his address in my pocket book. How forlorn I am already, though he still sits here beside me. Couldn't I shoot myself quickly in the foot so as to be able to go with him.
 Suddenly Kat gurgles and turns green and yellow, "Let us go on," he stammers.
 I jump up, eager to help him, I take him up and start off at a run, a slow, steady pace, so as not to jolt his leg too much.
 My throat is parched; everything dances red and black before my eyes, I stagger on doggedly and pitilessly and at last reach the dressing station.
 There I drop down on my knees, but have still enough strength to fall on to the side where Kat's sound leg is. After a few minutes I straighten myself up again. My legs and my hands tremble. I have trouble in finding my water bottle, to take a pull. My lips tremble as I try to think. But I smile: Kat is saved.
 After a while I begin to sort out the confusion of voices that falls on my ears.
 "You might have spared yourself that," says an orderly.
 I look at him without comprehending.
 He points to Kat. "He is stone dead."
 I do not understand him. "He has been hit in the shin," I say.
 The orderly stands still. "That as well."
 I turn round. My eyes are still dulled, the sweat breaks out on me again, it runs over my eyelids. I wipe it away and peer at Kat. He lies still. "Fainted," I say quickly.
 The orderly whistles softly. "I know better than that. He is dead. I'll lay any money on that."
 I shake my head: "Not possible. Only ten minutes ago I was talking to him. He has fainted."
 Kat's hands are warm, I pass my hand under his shoulders in order to rub his temples with some tea. I feel my fingers become moist. As I draw them away from behind his head, they are bloody. "You see?" The orderly whistles once more through his teeth.
 On the way without my having noticed it, Kat has caught a splinter in the head. There is just one little hole, it must have been a very tiny, stray splinter. But it has sufficed. Kat is dead.
 Slowly I get up.
" Would you like to take his paybook and his things?" the lance-corporal asks me.
 I nod and he gives them to me.
 The orderly is mystified. "You are not related, are you?"
 No, we are not related. No, we are not related.
 Do I walk? Have I feet still? I raise my eyes, I let them move round, and turn myself with them, one circle, one circle, and I stand in the midst. All is as usual. Only the Militiaman Stanislaus Katczinsky has died.
 Then I know nothing more.
