 He goes off. Things become quieter, but the cries do not cease. "What's up, Albert?" I ask.
 "A couple of columns over there got it in the neck."
 The cries continued. It is not men, they could not cry so terribly.
 "Wounded horses," says Kat.
 It's unendurable. It is the moaning of the world, it is the martyred creation, wild with anguish, filled with terror, and groaning.
 We are pale. Detering stands up. "God! For God's sake! Shoot them."
 He is a farmer and very fond of horses. It gets under his skin. Then as if deliberately the fire dies down again. The screaming of the beasts becomes louder. One can no longer distinguish whence in this now quiet silvery landscape it comes; ghostly, invisible, it is everywhere, between heaven and earth it rolls on immeasurably. Detering raves and yells out: "Shoot them! Shoot them, can't you? damn you again!"
 "They must look after the men first," says Kat quietly.
 We stand up and try to see where it is. If we could only see the animals we should be able to endure it better. Müller has a pair of glasses. We see a dark group, bearers with stretchers, and larger black clumps moving about. Those are the wounded horses. But not all of them. Some gallop away in the distance, fall down, and then run on farther. The belly of one is ripped open, the guts trail out. He becomes tangled in them and falls, then he stands up again.
 Detering raises up his gun and aims. Kat hits it in the air. "Are you mad?"
 Detering trembles and throws his rifle on the ground.
 We sit down and hold our ears. But this appalling noise, these groans and screams penetrate, they penetrate everywhere.
 We can bear almost anything. But now the sweat breaks out on us. We must get up and run no matter where, but where these cries can no longer be heard. And it is not men, only horses.
 From the dark group stretchers move off again. Then single shots crack out. The black heap convulses and then sinks down. At last! But still it is not the end. The men cannot overtake the wounded beasts which fly in their pain, their wide open mouths full of anguish. One of the men goes down on one knee, a shot; one horse drops; another. The last one props itself on its forelegs and drags itself round in a circle like a merry-go-round; squatting, it drags round in circles on its stiffened forelegs, apparently its back is broken. The soldier runs up and shoots it. Slowly, humbly, it sinks to the ground.
 We take our hands from our ears. The cries are silenced. Only a long-drawn, dying sigh still hangs on the air.
 Then only again the rockets, the singing of the shells and the stars there -- most strange.
 Detering walks up and down cursing: "Like to know what harm they've done." He returns to it once again. His voice is agitated, it sounds almost dignified as he says: "I tell you it is the vilestbaseness to use horses in the war."
