 Our stretchers stand on the platform. We wait for the train. It rains and the station has no roof. Our blankets are thin. We have waited already two hours.
 The sergeant-major looks after us like a mother. Although I feel pretty bad I do not let our scheme out of my mind. Casually I let him see the packet and give him one cigar in advance. In exchange the sergeant-major covers us over with a waterproof sheet.
 "Albert, old man," I suddenly bethink myself, "our four-poster and the cat…"
 "And the club chairs," he adds.
 Yes, the club chairs with red plush. In the evening we used to sit in them like lords, and intended later on to let them out by the hour. One cigarette per hour. It might have turned into a regular business, a real good living.
 "And our bags of grub, too, Albert."
 We grow melancholy. We might have made some use of the things. If only the train left one day later Kat would be sure to find us and bring us the stuff.
 What damned hard luck! In our bellies there is gruel, mean hospital stuff, and in our bags roast pork. But we are so weak that we cannot work up any more excitement about it.
 The stretchers are sopping wet by the time the train arrives in the morning. The sergeant-major sees to it that we are put in the same car. There is a crowd of red-cross nurses. Kropp is stowed in below. I am lifted up and told to get into the bed above him.
 "Good God!" I exclaim suddenly.
 "What is it?" asks the sister.
 I cast a glance at the bed. It is covered with clean snow-white linen, that even has got the marks of the iron still on it. And my shirt has gone six weeks without being washed and is terribly muddy.
 "Can't you get in by yourself?" asks the sister gently.
 "Why yes," I say in a sweat, "but take off the bed cover first."
 "What for?"
 I feel like a pig. Must I get in there? "It will get I hesitate.
 "A little bit dirty?" she suggests helpfully. "That doesn't matter, we will wash it again afterwards."
 "No, no, not that…" I say excitedly. I am not equal to such overwhelming refinement.
 "When you have been lying out there in the trenches, surely we can wash a sheet," she goes on.
 I look at her, she is young and crisp, spotless and neat, like everything here; a man cannot realise that it isn't for officers only, and feels himself strange and in some way even alarmed.
 All the same the woman is a tormentor, she is going to force me to say it. "It is only…" I try again, surely she must know what I mean.
 "What is it then?"
 "Because of the lice," I bawl out at last.
 She laughs. "Well, they must have a good day for once, too."
 Now I don't care any more. I scramble into bed and pull up the covers.
 A hand gropes over the bed-cover. The sergeant-major. He goes off with the cigars.
 An hour later we notice we are moving.
