 We are in the same room in a Catholic Hospital. That is a piece of luck, the Catholic infirmaries are noted for their good treatment and good food. The hospital has been filled up from our train, there are a great many bed cases amongst them. We do not get examined to-day because there are too few surgeons. The flat trolleys with the rubber wheels pass continually along the corridor, and always with someone stretched at full length upon them. A damnable position, stretched out full length like that; the only time it is good is when one is asleep.
 The night is very disturbed. No one can sleep. Toward morning we doze a little. I wake up just as it grows light. The doors stand open and 1 hear voices from the corridor. The others wake up too. One fellow who has been there a couple of days already explains it to us: "Up here in the corridor every morning the sisters say prayers. They call it Morning Devotion. And so that you can get your share, they leave the door open."
 No doubt it is well meant, but it gives us aches in our heads and bones.
 "Such an absurdity!" I say, "just when a man dropped off to sleep."
 "All the light cases are up here, that's why they do it here," he replies.
 Albert groans. I get furious and call out: "Be quiet out there!"
 A minute later a sister appears. In her black and white dress she looks like a beautiful tea-cosy.  "Shut the door, will you, sister?" says someone.
 "We are saying prayers, that is why the door is open," she responds.
 "But we want to go on sleeping…"
 "Prayer is better than sleeping," she stands there and smiles innocently. "And it is seven o'clock already."
 Albert groans again. "Shut the door," I snort.
 She is quite disconcerted. Apparently she cannot understand. "But we are saying prayers for you too."
 "Shut the door, anyway."
 She disappears, leaving the door open. The intoning of the litany proceeds.
 I feel savage, and say: "I'm going to count up to three. If it doesn't stop before then I'll let something fly."
 "Me too," says another.
 I count up to five. Then I take hold of a bottle, aim, and heave it through the door into the corridor. It smashes into a thousand pieces. The praying stops. A swarm of sisters appear and reproach us in concert.
 "Shut the door!" we yell.
 They withdraw. The little one who came first is the last to go. "Heathen," she chirps but shuts the door all the same. We have won.
