 Some time ago there was an army theatre in these parts. Coloured posters of the performances are still sticking on a hoarding. With wide eyes Kropp and I stand in front of it. We can hardly credit that such things still exist, A girl in a light summer dress, with a red patent-leather belt about her hips! She is standing with one hand on a railing and with the other she holds a straw hat. She wears white stockings and white shoes, fine buckle shoes with high heels. Behind her smiles the blue sea with white-horses, at the side is a bright bay. She is a lovely girl with a delicate nose, red lips, and slender legs, wonderfully clean and well cared for, she certainly baths twice a day and never has any dirt under her nails. At most perhaps a bit of sand from the beach.
 Beside her stands a man in white trousers, a blue jacket, and sailor's cap; but he interests us much less.
 The girl on the poster is a wonder to us. We have quite forgotten that there are such things, and even now we hardly believe our eyes. We have seen nothing like it for years, nothing like it for happiness, beauty and joy. That is peace-time, that is as it should be; we feel excited.
 "Just look at those thin shoes though, she couldn't march many miles in those," I say, and then begin to feel silly, for it is absurd to stand in front of a picture like this and think of nothing but marching.
 "How old would she be?" Kropp asks.
 "About twenty-two at the most," I hazard.
 "Then she would be older than us! She is not more then seventeen, let me tell you!"
 It gives us goose flesh.
 "That would be good, Albert, what do you think?"
 He nods. "I have some white trousers at home too."
 "White trousers," say I, "but a girl like that…"
 We look askance at one another. There's not much to boast of here, two ragged, stained, and dirty uniforms. It is hopeless to compete.
 So we proceed to tear the young man with the white trousers off the hoarding, taking care not to damage the girl. That is something toward it.
 "We could go and get deloused, anyway," Kropp then suggests.
 I am not very enthusiastic because it doesn't do one's clothes any good and a man is lousy again inside two hours. But when we have considered the picture once more, I declare myself willing. I go even farther.
 "We might see if we could get a clean shirt as well."
 "Socks might be better," says Albert, not without reason.
 "Yes, socks too perhaps. Let's go and explore a bit."
 Then Leer and Tjaden stroll up; they look at the poster and immediately the conversation becomes smutty. Leer was the first of our class to have intercourse, and he gave stirring details of it. After his fashion he enjoys himself over the picture, and Tjaden supports him nobly.
 It does not distress us exactly. Who isn't smutty is no soldier; it merely does not suit us at the moment, so we edge away and march off to the de-lousing station with the same feeling as if it were a swell gentlemen's outfitters.
