 I lie down on many a station platform; I stand before many a soup-kitchen; I squat on many a bench; then at last the landscape becomes disturbing, mysterious, and familiar. It glides past the western windows with its villages, their thatched roofs like caps, pulled over the whitewashed, half-timbered houses, its corn-fields, gleaming like mother-of-pearl in the slanting light, its orchards, its barns and old lime trees.
 Smooth meadows, fields, farm-yards; a solitary team moves against the sky-line along the road that runs parallel to the horizon. A barrier, before which peasants stand waiting, girls waving, children playing on the embankment, roads, leading into the country, smooth roads without artillery.
 It is evening, and if the train did not rattle I should cry out. The plain unfolds itself.
 In the distance, the soft, blue silhouette of the mountain ranges begins to appear. I recognise the characteristic outline of the Dolbenberg, a jagged comb, springing up precipitously from the limits of the forests. Behind it should lie the town.
 But now the sun streams through the world, dissolving everything in its golden-red light, the train swings round one curve and then another; far away, in a long line one behind the other, stand the poplars, unsubstantial, swaying and dark, fashioned out of shadow, light, and desire.
 The field swings round as the train encircles it, and the intervals between the trees diminish; the trees become a block and for a moment I see one only--then they reappear from behind the foremost tree and stand out a long line against the sky until they are hidden by the first houses.
 A street-crossing. I stand by the window, I cannot drag myself away. The others put their baggage ready for getting out. I repeat to myself the name of the street that we cross over "Bremer-strasse, Bremerstrasse" Below there are cyclists, lorries, men; it is a grey street and a grey subway; it affects me as though it were my mother.
 Then the train stops, and there is the station with noise and cries and signboards. I pick up my pack and fasten the straps, I take my rifle in my hand and stumble down the steps.
 On the platform I look round; I know no one among all the people hurrying to and fro. A red-cross sister offers me something to drink. I turn away, she smiles at me too foolishly, so obsessed with her own importance: "Just look, I am giving a soldier coffee!" She calls me "Comrade," but I will have none of it.
 Here we have often sat: how long ago it is; we have passed over this bridge and breathed the cool, acid smell of the stagnant water; we have leaned over the still water on this side of the lock, where the green creepers and weeds hang from the piles of the bridge; and on hot days we rejoiced in the spouting foam on the other side of the lock and told tales about our school-teachers.
 I pass over the bridge, I look right and left; the water is as full of weeds as ever, and it still shoots over in gleaming arches; in the tower-building laundresses still stand with bare arms as they used to over the clean linen, and the heat from the ironing pours out through the open windows. Dogs trot along the narrow street, before the doors of the houses people stand and follow me with their gaze as I pass by, dirty and heavy laden.
 In this confectioner's we used to eat ices, and there we learned to smoke cigarettes. Walking down the street I know every shop, the grocer's, the chemist's, the baker's. Then at last I stand before the brown door with its worn latch and my hand grows heavy. I open the door and a strange coolness comes out to meet me, my eyes are dim.
 The stairs creak under my boots. Upstairs a door rattles, someone is looking over the railing. It is the kitchen door that was opened, they are cooking potato-cakes, the house reeks of it, and to- day of course is Saturday; that will be my sister leaning over. For a moment I am shy and lower my head, then I take off my helmet and look up. Yes, it is my eldest sister.
 "Paul," she cries, "Paul!"
 I nod, my pack bumps against the bannisters; my rifle is so heavy.
 She pulls a door open and calls: "Mother, mother, Paul is here."
 I can go no further. "Mother, mother, Paul is here."
