 I cannot write that down. This quaking, sobbing woman who shakes me and cries out on me: "Why are you living then, when he is dead?" Who drowns me in tears and calls out: "What are you there for at all, child, when you?" Who drops into a chair and wails: "Did you see him? Did you see him then? How did he die?"
 I tell her he was shot through the heart and died instantaneously. She looks at me, she doubts me: "You lie. I know better. I have felt how terribly he died. I have heard his voice at night, I have felt his anguish. Tell the truth, I want to know it, I must know it."
 "No," I say, "I was beside him. He died at once."
 She pleads with me gently: "Tell me. You must tell me. I know you want to comfort me, but don't you see, you torment me far more than if you told me the truth? I cannot bear the uncertainty. Tell me how it was and even though it will be terrible, it will be far better than what I have to think if you don't."
 I will never tell her, she can make mincemeat out of me first. I pity her, but she strikes me as rather stupid all the same. Why doesn't she stop worrying? Kemmerich will stay dead whether she knows about it or not. When a man has seen so many dead he cannot understand any longer why there should be so much anguish over a single individual. So I say rather impatiently: "He died immediately. He felt absolutely nothing at all. His face was quite calm."
 She is silent. Then she says slowly: "Will you swear it?"
 "Yes."
 "By everything that is sacred to you?"
 Good God, what is there that is sacred to me?--such things change pretty quickly with us.
 "Yes, he died at once."
 "Are you willing never to come back yourself, if it isn't true?"
 "May I never come back if he wasn't killed instantaneously."
 I would swear to anything. But she seems to believe me. She moans and weeps steadily. I have to tell how it happened, so I invent a story and I almost believe it myself.
 As I leave she kisses me and gives me a picture of him. In his recruit's uniform he leans on a round rustic table with legs made of birch branches. Behind him a wood is painted on a curtain, and on the table stands a mug of beer.
