 Kropp and Müller are amusing themselves. From somewhere or other, probably the pioneer-cook-house, Kropp has bagged for himself a mess-tin full of beans. Müller squints hungrily into it but checks himself and says "Albert, what would you do if it were suddenly peace-time again?"
 "There won't be any peace-time," says Albert bluntly.
 "Well, but if--" persists Müller, "what would you do?"
 "Clear out of this!" growls Kropp.
 "Of course. And then what?"
 "Get drunk," says Albert.
 "Don't talk rot, I mean seriously."
 "So do I," says Kropp, "what else should a man do?"
 Kat becomes interested. He levies tribute on Kropp's tin of beans, swallows some, then considers for a while and says: "You might get drunk first, of course, but then you'd take the next train for home and mother. Peace-time, man, Albert--"
 He fumbles in his oil-cloth pocket-book for a photograph and suddenly shows it all round. "My old woman!" Then he puts it back and swears: "Damned lousy war."
 "It's all very well for you to talk," I tell him. "You've a wife and children."
 "True," he nods, "and I have to see to it that they've something to eat."
 We laugh. "They won't lack for that, Kat, you'd scrounge it from somewhere."
 Müller is insatiable and gives himself no peace. He wakes Haie Westhus out of his dream. "Haie, what would you do if it was peacetime?"
 "Give you a kick in the backside for the way you talk," I say. "How does it come about exactly?"
 "How does the cow-shit come on the roof?" retorts Müller laconically, and turns to Haie Westhus again.
 It is too much for Haie. He shakes his freckled head: "You mean when the war's over?"
 "Exactly. You've said it."
 "Well, there'd be women of course, eh?" Haie licks his lips.
 "Sure."
 "By Jove, yes," says Haie, his face melting, "then I'd grab some good buxom dame, some real kitchen wench with plenty to get hold of, you know, and jump straight into bed. Just you think, boys, a real featherbed with a spring mattress; I wouldn't put trousers on again for a week."
 Everyone is silent. The picture is too good. Our flesh creeps. At last Müller pulls himself together and says: "And then what?"
 A pause. Then Haie explains rather awkwardly: "If I were a non-com. I'd stay with the Prussians and serve out my time."
 "Haie, you've got a screw loose, surely!" I say.
 "Have you ever dug peat?" he retorts good-naturedly. "You try it."
 Then he pulls a spoon out of the top of his boot and reaches over into Kropp's mess-tin.
 "It can't be worse than digging trenches," I venture.
 Haie chews and grins: "It lasts longer though. And there's no getting out of it either."
 "But, man, surely it's better at home."
 "Some ways," says he, and with open mouth sinks into a day-dream.
 You can see what he is thinking. There is the mean little hut on the moors, the hard work on the heath from morning till night in the heat, the miserable pay, the dirty labourer's clothes.
 "In the army in peace-time you've nothing to trouble about," he goes on, "your food's found every day, or else you kick up a row; you've a bed, every week clean underwear like a perfect gent, you do your non-com.'s duty, you have a good suit of clothes; in the evening you're a free man and go off to the pub."
 Haie is extraordinarily set on his idea. He's in love with it.
 "And when your twelve years are up you get your pension and become the village bobby, and you can walk about the whole day."
 He's already sweating on it. "And just you think how you'd be treated. Here a dram, there a pint. Everybody wants to be well in with a bobby."
 "You'll never be a non-com, though, Haie," interrupts Kat.
 Haie looks at him sadly and is silent. His thoughts still linger over the clear evenings in autumn, the Sundays in the heather, the village bells, the afternoons and evenings with the servant girls, the fried bacon and barley, the care-free hours in the ale-house. He can't part with all these dreams so abruptly; he merely growls: "What silly questions you do ask."
 He pulls his shirt over his head and buttons up his tunic.
 "What would you do, Tjaden!" asks Kropp.
 Tjaden thinks of one thing only. "See to it that Himmelstoss didn't get past me."
 Apparently he would like most to have him in a cage and sail into him with a club every morning. To Kropp he says warmly: "If I were in your place I'd see to it that I became a lieutenant. Then you could grind him till the water in his backside boils."
 "And you, Detering!" asks Müller like an inquisitor. He's a born schoolmaster with all his questions.
 Detering is sparing with his words. But on this subject he speaks. He looks at the sky and says only the one sentence: "I would go straight on with the harvesting."
 Then he gets up and walks off.
 He is worried. His wife has to look after the farm. They've already taken away two more of his horses. Every day he reads the papers that come, to see whether it is raining in his little corner of Oldenburg. They haven't brought in the hay yet At this moment Himmelstoss appears. He comes straight up to our group. Tjaden's face turns red. He stretches his length on the grass and shuts his eyes in excitement.
