 Müller hasn't finished yet. He tackles Kropp again.
 "Albert, if you were really at home now, what would you do?"
 Kropp is contented now and more accommodating: "How many of us were there in the class exactly?"
 We count up: out of twenty, seven are dead, four wounded, one in a mad-house. That makes twelve.
 "Three of them are lieutenants," says Müller. "Do you think they would still let Kantorek sit on them?"
 "What do you mean by the three-fold theme in "William Tell'?" says Kropp reminiscently, and roars with laughter.
 "What was the purpose of the Poetic League of Göttingen?" asked Müller suddenly and earnestly.
 "How many children had Charles the Bald?" I interrupt gently.
 "You'll never make anything of your life, Bäumer," croaks Müller.
 "When was the battle of Zana?" Kropp wants to know. 
 "You lack the studious mind, Kropp, sit down, three minus…" I say.
 "What offices did Lycurgus consider the most important for the state?" asks Müller, pretending to take off his pince-nez.
 "Does it go: 'We Germans fear God and none else in the whole world,' or 'We, the Germans, fear God and…' " I submit.
 "How many inhabitants has Melbourne?" asks Müller.
 "How do you expect to succeed in life if you don't know that?" I ask Albert hotly.
 Which he caps with: "What is meant by Cohesion?"
 We remember mighty little of all that rubbish. Anyway, it has never been the slightest use to us. At school nobody ever taught us how to light a cigarette in a storm of rain, nor how a fire could be made with wet wood; nor that it is best to stick a bayonet in the belly because there it doesn't get jammed, as it does in the ribs.
 Müller says thoughtfully: "What's the use? We'll have to go back and sit on the forms again."
 I consider that out of the question. "We might take a special exam."
 "That needs preparation. And if you do get through, what then? A student's life isn't any better. If you have no money, you have to work like the devil."
 "It's a bit better. But it's rot all the same, everything they teach you."
 Kropp supports me: "How can a man take all that stuff seriously when he's once been out here?"
 "Still you must have an occupation of some sort," insists Müller, as though he were Kantorek himself.
 Albert cleans his nails with a knife. We are surprised at this delicacy. But it is merely pensiveness. He puts the knife away and continues: "That's just it. Kat and Detering and Haie will go back to their jobs because they had them already. Himmelstoss too. But we never had any. How will we ever get used to one after this, here?" He makes a gesture toward the front.
 "What we'll want is a private income, and then we'll be able to live by ourselves in a wood," I say, but at once feel ashamed of this absurd idea.
 "But what will really happen when we go back?" wonders Müller, and even he is troubled.
 Kropp gives a shrug. "I don't know. Let's get back first, then we'll find out."
 We are all utterly at a loss. "What could we do?" I ask.
 "I don't want to do anything," replies Kropp wearily. "You'll be dead one day, so what does it matter? I don't think we'll ever go back."
 "When I think about it, Albert," I say after a while rolling over on my back, "when I hear the word 'peace-time,' it goes to my head: and if it really came, I think I would do some unimaginable thing; something, you know, that it's worth having lain here in the muck for. But I can't even imagine anything. All I do know is that this business about professions and studies and salaries and so on--it makes me sick, it is and always was disgusting. I don't see anything at all, Albert."
 All at once everything seems to me confused and hopeless.
 Kropp feels it too. "It will go pretty hard with us all. But nobody at home seems to worry much about it. Two years of shells and bombs; a man won't peel that off as easy as a sock."
 We agree that it's the same for everyone; not only for us here, but everywhere, for everyone who is of our age; to some more, and to others less. It is the common fate of our generation.
 Albert expresses it: "The war has ruined us for everything."
 He is right. We are not youth any longer. We don't want to take the world by storm. We are fleeing. We fly from ourselves. From our life. We were eighteen and had begun to love life and the world; and we had to shoot it to pieces. The first bomb, the first explosion, burst in our hearts. We are cut off from activity, from striving, from progress. We believe in such things no longer, we believe in the war.
